Docs: Plugin docs for Dataframes (#23483)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/plugins/developing/dataframe.md

+++
title = "Introduction Dataframes"
type = "docs"
[menu.docs]
name = "Dataframes"
parent = "developing"
weight = 9
draft = true
+++

## Introduction to dataframes

Dataframes were introduced in Grafana 7.0. They replace the Time Series and Table types in Grafana. Dataframes are a more generic structure that can hold different shapes of time series, tables, and other types.

A dataframe is a [Columnar oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Column-oriented_DBMS) table structure, meaning it stores data by column and not by row.

> **Simplified dataframe model:**

Reviewer: How is this simplified? Have we removed fields or properties?

> **Simplified dataframe model:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**The dataframe model:**
```

```ts

> interface DataFrame {

Reviewer: Have we agreed on whether it's "dataframe" or "data frame". This interface name seems to indicate that it's two words, but the rest of the article uses one word.

Reviewer 2: It's DataFrame in the frontend. https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/packages/grafana-data/src/types/dataFrame.ts#L108 It's Frame in the backend (avoiding studder)
https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/blob/master/data/frame.go#L29

Googling differents combinations returns different results. 

Given the code I suggest we use two words.

Reviewer: In case no one has a counter-argument, I also suggest we use two words 👍

    labels?: Record<string, string>;

    // For example string, number, time (or more specific primitives in the backend)
    type:   FieldType;
    // Array of values all of the same type
    values: Vector<T>;

    // Optional display data for the field (e.g. unit, name over-ride, etc)
    config: FieldConfig;
}
```

With dataframes, each column is represented by a **Field**. So the essence of a dataframe is an Field array with additional properties on both the dataframe and its Fields.

One restriction on dataframes is that all Fields in the frame must be of the same length to be a valid dataframe.

### When is a dataframe a time series or a table

Any valid dataframe can be a table. If you have row-oriented data, the rows need to be converted to the dataframe's column-oriented structure.

Because each Field in a dataframe has a type, we can use the types of the Fields (the schema of the dataframe) to determine if it dataframe, or a collection of dataframes, can be time series. In the simplest case, if a Frame has a Time Field and Number Field then it can be a time series (the frame should be sorted by time ascending).

#### Time series with unshared time values

> An array of frames is how a collection of time series that do not share a time index would be represented. For example, two time series (differentiated by their labels):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collection of time series that don't share a time index would be represented as an array of frames. For example, two time series (differentiated by their labels):
```

```text
Name: cpu
Dimensions: 2 Fields by 2 Rows
+---------------------+-----------------+
| Name: time          | Name: cpu       |
| Labels:             | Labels: host=a  |
| Type: []time.Time   | Type: []float64 |
+---------------------+-----------------+
| 2020-01-02 03:04:00 | 3               |
| 2020-01-02 03:05:00 | 6               |
+---------------------+-----------------+

Name: cpu
Dimensions: 2 Fields by 2 Rows
+---------------------+-----------------+
| Name: time          | Name: cpu       |
| Labels:             | Labels: host=b  |
| Type: []time.Time   | Type: []float64 |
+---------------------+-----------------+
| 2020-01-02 03:04:01 | 4               |
| 2020-01-02 03:05:01 | 7               |
+---------------------+-----------------+
```

> The name of the time Field does not matter, nor does its order in the frame (unless there are multiple time columns, in which case the first is used).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of the time Field doesn't matter, nor does its order in the frame (unless there are multiple time columns, in which case the first is used).
```

#### Time series with shared time values

If all the series share the same time values, then a "wide" format can be used:

```text
Name: Wide
Dimensions: 3 Fields by 2 Rows
+---------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Name: time          | Name: cpu       | Name: cpu       |
| Labels:             | Labels: host=a  | Labels: host=b  |
| Type: []time.Time   | Type: []float64 | Type: []float64 |
+---------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| 2020-01-02 03:04:00 | 3               | 4               |
| 2020-01-02 03:05:00 | 6               | 7               |
+---------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
```

#### Time series in long format

(Note: Currently supported on backend only: [Grafana Issue #22219](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/22219)).

A common CSV or SQL format is the [long (a.k.a tall/narrow) Format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wide_and_narrow_data) of time series data.

> This format is supported and is detected when there are also string columns in the dataframe. There can be multiple number and multiple string columns, and the series will be grouped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This format is supported and is detected when there are string columns in the dataframe. There can be multiple number and multiple string columns, and the series will be grouped.
```

| Name: time          | Name: aMetric    | Name: bMetric    | Name: aMetric    | Name: bMetric    |
| Labels:             | Labels: host=foo | Labels: host=foo | Labels: host=bar | Labels: host=bar |
| Type: []time.Time   | Type: []float64  | Type: []float64  | Type: []float64  | Type: []float64  |
+---------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| 2020-01-02 03:04:00 | 2                | 10               | 5                | 15               |
| 2020-01-02 03:05:00 | 3                | 11               | 6                | 16               |
+---------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
```

## Technical references

This section contains links to technical reference and implementations of dataframes.

### Apache Arrow

The dataframe structure is inspired by and uses the [Apache Arrow Project](https://arrow.apache.org/). Javascript Dataframes use Arrow Tables as the underlying structure, and the backend Go code serializes its Frames in Arrow Tables for transmission.

### Javascript

> The javascript implementation of dataframes is in the [`/src/dataframe` folder](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/master/packages/grafana-data/src/dataframe) and [`/src/types/dataframe.ts`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/packages/grafana-data/src/types/dataFrame.ts) of the [`@grafana/data` package](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/master/packages/grafana-data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Javascript implementation of dataframes is in the [`/src/dataframe` folder](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/master/packages/grafana-data/src/dataframe) and [`/src/types/dataframe.ts`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/packages/grafana-data/src/types/dataFrame.ts) of the [`@grafana/data` package](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/tree/master/packages/grafana-data).
```

### Go

> Documentation for the Go implementation of dataframes can be found in the [github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/data package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/data?tab=doc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For documentation on the Go implementation of dataframes, refer to the [github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/data package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/data?tab=doc).
```

weight = 9
+++

## Introduction to dataframes

> Dataframes are a new concept in Grafana 7.0 and they replace the Time Series and Table types in Grafana. Dataframes are a more generic structure that can hold different shapes of time series, tables, and other types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dataframes were introduced in Grafana 7.0. They replace the Time Series and Table types in Grafana. Dataframes are a more generic structure that can hold different shapes of time series, tables, and other types.
```

A dataframe is a [Columnar oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Column-oriented_DBMS) table structure, meaning it stores data by column and not by row.

> **Simplified dataframe model**:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Simplified dataframe model:**
```

> **Simplified dataframe model**:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Simplified dataframe model**
```

> One restriction on dataframes is that all Fields in the frame must be of the same length to be a valid dataframe.

Reviewer 3: "Field" in this context is not a proper noun. Please make it lowercase wherever applicable.

Reviewer 2: `Field` is the name of a field in the struct. https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/blob/master/data/frame.go#L35 Whats a good way to indicate the connection between docs and something in the code?

> ### When is a dataframe a time series or a table

Reviewer 3: Are "time series" and "table" proper nouns? Are they the names of something? I ask because you capitalize them earlier, but you lowercase them here. Please make them consistent.

Reviewer 2: Maybe. I don't really know... Dataframe could be considered a name I guess. Timeseries/table are formats.. Im not sure about this one. @kylebrandt  !!!

Reviewer 2: @oddlittlebird do we by any chance have a list of Grafana specific words and how we spell/capitalize them?

Reviewer 3: Yes, https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/contribute/style-guides/documentation-style-guide.md#capitalization.

However, these are sort of a gray area. If a word is used generically, then it should not be capitalized. This looks like the case here.

Reviewer 2: Agree. Let's go lowercase

> Any valid dataframe can be a table. If you have row oriented data, the rows need to be converted to the dataframe's column oriented structure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Any valid dataframe can be a table. If you have row-oriented data, the rows need to be converted to the dataframe's column-oriented structure.
```

Because each Field in a dataframe has a type, we can use the types of the Fields (the schema of the dataframe) to determine if it dataframe, or a collection of dataframes, can be time series. In the simplest case, if a Frame has a Time Field and Number Field then it can be a time series (the frame should be sorted by time ascending).

#### Time series with unshared time values

> An array of frames is how a collection of time series that do not share a time index would be represented. For example two time series (differentiated by their labels):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An array of frames is how a collection of time series that do not share a time index would be represented. For example, two time series (differentiated by their labels):
```

+---------------------+-----------------+-----------------+
```

#### Time series in long format

> (Note: Currently supported on backend only: [Grafana Issue #22219](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/22219)).

Reviewer 3: Is this still valid?

Reviewer 2: fixed

Reviewer 2: Yea. I have not idea how we should deal with statements like this. It's bound to get out of sync. Perhaps we should just remove it?
